When Columbus discovered the New World he brought back with him to Europe many
new and curious things, one of which was cacao. Some years later, in 1519, the
Spanish conquistador, Cortes, landed in Mexico, marched into the interior and
discovered to his surprise, not the huts of savages, but a beautiful city, with
palaces and museums. This city was the capital of the Aztecs, a remarkable
people, notable alike for their ancient civilisation and their wealth. Their
national drink was chocolate, and Montezuma, their Emperor, who lived in a
state of luxurious magnificence, "took no other beverage than the chocolatl, a
potation of chocolate, flavoured with vanilla and other spices, and so prepared
as to be reduced to a froth of the consistency of honey, which gradually
dissolved in the mouth and was taken cold. This beverage if so it could be
called, was served in golden goblets, with spoons of the same metal or
tortoise-shell finely wrought. The Emperor was exceedingly fond of it, to judge
from the quantityâ€”no less than fifty jars or pitchers being prepared for his
own daily consumption: two thousand more were allowed for that of his
household." It is curious that Montezuma took no other beverage than chocolate,
especially if it be true that the Aztecs also invented that fascinating drink,
the cocktail (xoc-tl). How long this ancient people, students of the mysteries
of culinary science, had known the art of preparing a drink from cacao, is not
known, but it is evident that the cultivation of cacao received great attention
in these parts, for if we read down the list of the tributes paid by different
cities to the Lords of Mexico, we find "20 chests of ground chocolate, 20 bags
of gold dust," again "80 loads of red chocolate, 20 lip-jewels of clear amber,"
and yet again "200 loads of chocolate."

Another people that share with the Aztecs the honour of being the first great
cultivators of cacao are the Incas of Peru, that wonderful nation that knew not
poverty. Cacao was used by the Aztecs not only for the preparation of a
beverage, but also as a circulating medium of exchange. For example, one could
purchase a "tolerably good slave" for 100 beans. We read that: "Their currency
consisted of transparent quills of gold dust, of bits of tin cut in the form of
a T, and of bags of cacao containing a specified number of grains." "Blessed
money," exclaims Peter Martyr, "which exempts its possessor from avarice, since
it cannot be long hoarded, nor hidden underground!" 
