Some of the phenomena of electricity are manifested upon so large a scale as to
be thrust upon the attention of everybody. Thus lightning, which accompanies so
many showers in warm weather in almost every latitude, has always excited in
some individuals a superstitious awe, as being an exhibition of supernatural
agency; and probably every one feels more or less dread of it during a
thunder-shower, and this for the reason that it affects so many of the senses
at the same time. The flash may be blinding to the eyes if near to us; the
thunder may be deafening to the ears, and so powerful as to shake the
foundations of the hills, and make the ground upon which we stand to sensibly
move: these with the remembered destructive effects that have been witnessed,
of buildings demolished and large trees torn to splinters in an instant, are
quite sufficient to raise a feeling of dread in the strongest mind. In the
polar regions, both north and south, where thunderstorms are less frequent, the
atmospheric electricity assumes the form called the aurora borealis, or the
aurora australis, according as it is seen north or south of the equator.

More than two thousand years ago it was noticed by the Greeks that a certain
kind of a mineral which was thrown up on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea,
when rubbed would attract light bodies, such as shreds of silk or linen and
bits of paper. To this substance they gave the name of Elektron, and the
property developed thus by friction was afterwards called electricity. In 1600
Dr. Gilbert, physician to Queen Elizabeth, published a book in which he
described numerous experiments demonstrating that electricity could be
developed by friction upon a great variety of substances, such as stones, gems,
and resins. The first machine for developing electricity was made by Otto von
Guericke of Magdeburg, about 1680. His machine consisted of a ball of sulphur
about six inches in diameter, which could be rotated. If the dry hand were held
against the sulphur while it was being turned in a dark room, the sphere
appeared to emit light: it also gave out a peculiar hissing or crackling sound.
Newton experimented a little with electricity, and noticed that the rubber was
an important element in developing electricity. He does not seem to have given
to the subject the same attention that he gave to some other departments of
science. Had he done so, it is probable that he would have advanced the study a
hundred years; that is to say, he would probably have left it at the place
where it actually was in 1790. So great were his abilities that in one lifetime
he made greater additions to human knowledge than all the rest of mankind had
made during the preceding thousand years. In the month of June, 1752, Franklin
made that memorable experiment which immortalized him. He flew his kite to the
thunder-cloud, practically asking the question of the lightning whether or not
it was identical with electricity. The lightning came down the wetted twine to
his hand, and proclaimed its identity.
