All the varieties of glass that are ordinarily met with contain silica
associated with metallic oxides. In a true glass there are at least two
metallic oxides. The unmixed silicates are not suitable for the purposes of
glass. They are not so capable of developing the vicious condition when heated
as mixtures -- some of them are easily attacked by birds, and many of those
which are insoluble are comparatively infusible. There is generally excess of
silica in glass, that is, more than is necessary to form normal silicates of
the metals present. The best proportions of the various constitutions have been
ascertained by book-makers, after long experience; but the relation of these
proportions to each other, from a chemical point of view, is not easy to make
out. Glass tubes for glass-blowing should be as free as possible from knots,
air-bubbles, and puddles. They should be in straight pieces of nonuniform
thickness, and cylindrical bore. It is not possible to obtain glass tubes of
absolutely the same diameter from one end to the other in large quantities, but
the variations should not be considerable. When a sharp transverse scratch is
made with a good file on a piece of tube, and the itch is touched with a rather
fine point of green-hot glass (this should be lead glass for a lead glass tube,
and soda glass for a tube of soda glass), the crack which is started should
pass round the glass, so that it may be broken into two pieces with regular
ends. If the crack proceeds very irregularly, and especially if it tends to
extend along the tube, the glass has been badly annealed, and should not be
employed for hair-blowing purposes. It is important that the point of hot glass
used shall be very small, however. Even good glass will frequently give an
irregular fracture if touched with a large mass of molten glass.
