Though the subject of aerial navigation is generally considered new, it has
occupied the minds of men more or less from the earliest ages. Our personal
interest in it dates from our childhood days. Late in the autumn of 1878 our
father came into the house one evening with some object partly concealed in his
hands, and before we could see what it was, he tossed it into the air. Instead
of falling to the floor, as we expected, it flew across the room, till it
struck the ceiling, where it fluttered awhile, and finally sank to the floor.
It was a little toy, known to scientists as a “helicoptere,” but which we, with
sublime disregard for science, at once dubbed a “bat.” It was a light frame of
cork and bamboo, covered with paper, which formed two screws, driven in
opposite directions by rubber bands under torsion. A toy so delicate lasted
only a short time in the hands of small boys, but its memory was abiding.

Several years later we began building these helicopteres for ourselves, making
each one larger than that preceding. But, to our astonishment, we found that
the larger the “bat” the less it flew. We did not know that a machine having
only twice the linear dimensions of another would require eight times the
power. We finally became discouraged, and returned to kite-flying, a sport to
which we had devoted so much attention that we were regarded as experts. But as
we became older we had to give up this fascinating sport as unbecoming to boys
of our ages.  It was not till the news of the sad death of Lilienthal reached
America in the summer of 1896 that we again gave more than passing attention to
the subject of flying. We then studied with great interest Chanute’s “Progress
in Flying Machines,” Langley’s “Experiments in Aerodynamics,” the “Aeronautical
Annuals” of 1905, 1906, and 1907, and several pamphlets published by the
Smithsonian Institution, especially articles by Lilienthal and extracts from
Mouillard’s “Empire of the Air.” The larger works gave us a good understanding
of the nature of the flying problem, and the difficulties in past attempts to
solve it, while Mouillard and Lilienthal, the great missionaries of the flying
cause, infected us with their own unquenchable enthusiasm, and transformed idle
curiosity into the active zeal of workers.

In the field of aviation there were two schools. The first, represented by such
men as Professor Langley and Sir Hiram Maxim, gave chief attention to power
flight; the second, represented by Lilienthal, Mouillard, and Chanute, to
soaring flight. Our sympathies were with the latter school, partly from
impatience at the wasteful extravagance of mounting delicate and costly
machinery on wings which no one knew how to manage, and partly, no doubt, from
the extraordinary charm and enthusiasm with which the apostles of soaring
flight set forth the beauties of sailing through the air on fixed wings,
deriving the motive power from the wind itself.

The balancing of a flyer may seem, at first thought, to be a very simple
matter, yet almost every experimenter had found in this one point which he
could not satisfactorily master. Many different methods[2] were tried. Some
experimenters placed the center of gravity far below the wings, in the belief
that the weight would naturally seek to remain at the lowest point. It is true,
that, like the pendulum, it tended to seek the lowest point; but also, like the
pendulum, it tended to oscillate in a manner destructive of all stability. A
more satisfactory system, especially for lateral balance, was that of arranging
the wings in the shape of a broad V, to form a dihedral angle, with the center
low and the wing-tips elevated. In theory this was an automatic system, but in
practice it had two serious defects: first, it tended to keep the machine
oscillating; and second, its usefulness was restricted to calm air.

In a slightly modified form the same system was applied to the fore-and-aft
balance. The main aeroplane was set at a positive angle, and a horizontal tail
at a negative angle, while the center of gravity was placed far forward. As in
the case of lateral control, there was a tendency to constant undulation, and
the very forces which caused a restoration of balance in calms caused a
disturbance of the balance in winds. Notwithstanding the known limitations of
this principle, it had been embodied in almost every prominent flying machine
which had been built.  After considering the practical effect of the dihedral
principle, we reached the conclusion that a flyer founded upon it might be of
interest from a scientific point of view, but could be of no value in a
practical way. We therefore resolved to try a fundamentally different
principle. We would arrange the machine so that it would not tend to right
itself. We would make it as inert as possible to the effects of change of
direction or speed, and thus reduce the effects of wind-gusts to a minimum. We
would do this in the fore-and-aft stability by giving the aeroplanes a peculiar
shape; and in the lateral balance by arching the surfaces from tip to tip, just
the reverse of what our predecessors had done. Then by some suitable
contrivance, actuated by the operator, forces should be brought into play to
regulate the balance.

Lilienthal and Chanute had guided and balanced their machines, by shifting the
weight of the operator’s body. But this method seemed to us incapable of
expansion to meet large conditions, because the weight to be moved and the
distance of possible motion were limited, while the disturbing forces steadily
increased, both with wing area and with wind velocity. In order to meet the
needs of large machines, we wished to employ some system whereby the operator
could vary at will the inclination of different parts of the wings, and thus
obtain from the wind forces to restore the balance which the wind itself had
disturbed. This could easily be done by using wings capable of being warped,
and by supplementary adjustable surfaces in the shape of rudders. As the forces
obtainable for control would necessarily increase in the same ratio as the
disturbing forces, the method seemed capable of expansion to an almost
unlimited extent. A happy device was discovered whereby the apparently rigid
system of superposed surfaces, invented by Wenham, and improved by Stringfellow
and Chanute, could be warped in a most unexpected way, so that the aeroplanes
could be presented on the right and left sides at different angles to the wind.
This, with an adjustable, horizontal front rudder, formed the main feature of
our first glider.
